# Optimal-IPL-team_Data_Analysis
The Indian Premier League (IPL) is an annual T20 tournament held in India. It was started in 2008 by the BCCI and it is now in its 13th season. It is now considered to be the best T20 tournament in the world. The success of the IPL can be attributed to a number of things, but one substantial factor to it was the quality of cricket it produced, hence providing quality entertainment for the audience. The IPL teams are owned by franchises that participate in auctions to purchase players- both domestic and international. The auctions are held every year, where players released from the teams and other uncapped players are put up to bid. A team is allowed to have a maximum of 25 players in its squad. The playing eleven of a team must have a maximum of four overseas players. The auctions are held every year, where players released from the teams and other uncapped players are put up to bid. Every team spends a large amount of time and money to decide which eleven players to select from the 25 in the bag. The T20 format is a peculiar one, where the game is slightly skewed in favour of the batsmen compared to the bowlers. Shorter boundaries, a 6 over power play, day/night conditions etc. make up the reasons for that. Hence, there is no doubt that the teams give emphasis on the strength of their batting line up. Teams tend to have a mix of batsmen that can score at a good strike rate and those that bring stability to prevent a collapse. The order in which the two kinds of batsmen are sent also makes a huge difference. The opening pair generally has one batsman that can be explosive and another that takes a few balls to get going. The middle order is considered to be very crucial in T20 and it generally has a combination of experienced batsmen that can take the game till the end and batsman who can score big from the first ball. All-rounders are also known as game changers in the T20 format, as they can contribute with either their batting or bowling. Teams prefer to have a mix of batting and bowling all-rounders, and it is the all-rounders of a team that are generally juggled around in accordance to the match being played. Since the game is skewed in favour of batting, it also becomes very important for a team to have a potent and balanced bowling line up. In the modern game, the diversity of bowlers is far greater. The line-up needs to have a mix of spin and seam bowling; impact bowlers that can either take wickets with the new ball, take control of the middle overs or restrict the opposition in the death overs. In the IPL, teams also have to decide on which four overseas players get their place in the playing eleven. Given all this, we tend to notice that the process of selecting a playing eleven requires the teams to analyse all of their players individually to figure out whether they make the cut and where they are to be placed. Data Analytics and mathematical modelling can be extensively used in the process. This paper performs various exploratory data analysis (EDA) on a couple of datasetsthe ball by ball dataset of the IPL and the match dataset to derive at required intuitions and deeper understanding of the game that will facilitate in the final effort to build a comprehensive model to compute the playing eleven of an IPL team given a particular squad. EDA is performed on different aspects of the game such as- analysis of fielding and dismissals, toss analysis, average of batsmen against a team, average wickets of a bowler against a team etc. The data gathered from this will be used to compute ratings of all the players, which in turn will help in deciding the playing eleven of a squad.

